AIM : Implement the C program for CPU Scheduling Algorithms: Shortest 
Job First (Preemptive) and Round Robin with different arrival time.
OBJECTIVES : To study
 CPU Scheduling
 Round Robin
THEORY :
To calculate the average waiting time in the shortest job first algorithm the sorting of the 
process based on their burst time in ascending order then calculate the waiting time of each 
process as the sum of the bursting times of all the process previous or before to that process. 
ALGORITHM: 
Step 1: Start the process 
Step 2: Accept the number of processes in the ready Queue 
Step 3: For each process in the ready Q, assign the process id and accept the CPU burst time 
Step 4: Start the Ready Q according the shortest Burst time by sorting according to lowest to 
highest burst time. 
Step 5: Set the waiting time of the first process as ‗0‘ and its turnaround time as its burst 
time. 
Step 6: Sort the processes names based on their Burst time 
Step 7: For each process in the ready queue, calculate a) Waiting time(n)= waiting time (n1) + Burst time (n-1) b) Turnaround time (n)= waiting time(n)+Burst time(n) 
Step 8: Calculate c) Average waiting time = Total waiting Time / Number of process 
d)Average Turnaround time = Total Turnaround Time / Number of process 
Step 9: Stop the process
To aim is to calculate the average waiting time. There will be a time slice, each process 
should be executed within that time-slice and if not it will go to the waiting state so first 
check whether the burst time is less than the time-slice. If it is less than it assign the waiting 
 Department of Information Technology Page 42 of 97
time to the sum of the total times. If it is greater than the burst-time then subtract the time 
slot from the actual burst time and increment it by time-slot and the loop continues until all 
the processes are completed. 
ALGORITHM: 
Step 1: Start the process 
Step 2: Accept the number of processes in the ready Queue and time quantum (or) time slice 
Step 3: For each process in the ready Q, assign the process id and accept the CPU burst time 
Step 4: Calculate the no. of time slices for each process where No. of time slice for process 
(n) = burst time process (n)/time slice 
Step 5: If the burst time is less than the time slice then the no. of time slices =1. 
Step 6: Consider the ready queue is a circular Q, calculate a) Waiting time for process (n) = 
waiting time of process(n-1)+ burst time of process(n-1 ) + the time difference in getting the 
CPU from process(n-1) b) Turnaround time for process(n) = waiting time of process(n) + 
burst time of process(n)+ the time difference in getting CPU from process(n). 
Step 7: Calculate c) Average waiting time = Total waiting Time / Number of process d) 
Average Turnaround time = Total Turnaround Time / Number ofprocess 
Step 8: Stop the process
